Packet tracers is a tool that allows you to simulate real networks.
You can use its menus to;
Add devices and connect them via cables or wireless.
Select, delete, inspect, label and group components within your network.
Manage your network.
The network management allows you;
Open an existing/sample network.
Save your current network.
Modify your user profile or your preferences.
Packet Tracer provides a variety of tabs for device configuration like;
Physical Tab provides an interface for interacting with the device including powering it on or off or installing different modules, such as wireless network interface card(NIC).
Config Tab for intermediate devices such as routers and switches. It can be accessed using a GUI or CLI.
CLI Tab provides access to the command line interface of a Cisco device.
Desktop Tab provides a desktop interface that gives you access to IP configuration, wireless configuration, a command prompt, a web browser, and other applications.
Service Tab allows the server to be configured with common server processes such as HTTP, DHCP, DNS, or other services.
Packet tracer has the ability to create four different types of file and these files are used for different purposes. They include; '.pka', '.pkt', '.pksz', and '.pkz'.
The .pka File type is a packet tracer activity file, the 'a' in the suffix meaning activity. This activity has an instruction window. This file type contains two networks which are; an Initial network and an Answer network. The initial network opens when you launch the activity while, the answer network runs in the background and can be used to provide scoring and feedback to learners as they complete the activity. Learners don't have access to answer network in a .pka file. The packet tracer activity instructions window provides the procedures required to complete the activity, assignment or assessment and it can also display completion percentage to track how much of the activity has been successfully completed.
The .pkt file type is created when a simulated network is created is built in packet tracer and saved. It can also have graphic background images embedded within it.
The .pksz file type is specific to Packet Tracer Tutor Activity(PTTA). It bundles a .pka file, media assets, and a scripting file for the hinting system. In summary, it supports student through the provision of hint for completing their activity.
The .pkz file type is a depreciated file type, it was previously used to embed images and other files in a packet tracer file but images are now embedded directly within a regular .pkt or .pka file
Cisco Packet Tracer Assessments: There are two types of assessment items that take advantage of packet tracer and they include Packet Tracer Media Objects(PTMO) and Packet Tracer Skills Assessment(PTSA). PTMOs can be either a .pkt or .pka file. A PTMO will show up inline with a question on your quiz, module exam, or some other type of graded assessment. You launch the .pkt or .pka file directly from inside the assessment. Typically, you configure the network or investigate the topology, and then answer a multiple choice assessment question or questions. You can encounter PTSAs at a mid-point in a course or at the end of the course. PTSAs are summative skill assessments in which you demonstrate your skill by implementing the technologies that you have learned. PTSAs are standalone assessments, have their own grading engine, and the results are recorded in a course gradebook, if there is one. After completing a PTSA, you receive item level feedback for each graded component.
NB: The IP addresses for the end devices can range from 192.168.0.2 to 192.168.0.254. Each NIC will get a unique IP address in the same network.
The subnet mask is used to differentiate the host and the network ID portion of the IP address. You can relate the IP address to your street address. The subnet mask defines the length of the street name. The network part of the address is your street, 192.168.0. The house number is the host port of the IP address. For the IP address 192.168.0.2, the house number is 2 and the street is 192.168.0. If there is more than one house on the same street, for example, house number 3, will have an address 192.168.0.3. The maximum number of houses on this street is 253, ranging from 2 to 254.
The default gateway is analogous to the street intersection. The traffic from the 192.168.0 street has to exit through the intersection to another street. Another street is another network. In this network, default gateway is the wireless router that directs the traffic from the local network to the cable modem, and the traffic is then sent to the ISP.