Cybersecurity professionals must have the same skills as hackers especially black hat hackers in order to protect against attacks.
The difference between a hacker and a cybersecurity professional is that the cybersecurity professional must work within legal boundaries.
Personal Legal Issues: You must not be a cybersecurity employee before you become subject to cybersecurity laws. Having the skills to hack another persons computer or network does not mean you should. As a hacker, you can leave tracks and you can be followed back and be caught. Your skills can be used for good or evil, using it for the right cause should be your ultimate goal.
Corporate Legal Issues: Most countries have cybersecurity laws in place and businesses must have to abide by these laws. In some cases, if you break these laws, the company will be penalized and you might likely lose your job or in some cases you might be prosecuted, fined, and possibly sentenced. If yo are confused whether an act is illegal, it is best you don't do it. If your company has a legal department or a human resource department, you can enquire from them before you do something illegal.
Ethical Issues in Cybersecurity: Cybersecurity professionals must also demonstrate ethical behavior. Ethics are codes of behavior that are sometimes enforced by laws.
Personal Ethical Issues: A person may act unethically and not be subject to prosecution, fines or imprisonment because this might not be technically illegal but this does not mean the behavior is acceptable.
Before acting on anything, ask yourself these questions?
Would i want to discover that someone has hacked into my computer and altered images in my social network sites?
Would I want to discover that an IT technician whom i trusted to fix my network, told colleagues personal information about me that was gained while working on my network?
If your answer to these questions is No, then do not do such things to others.
Corporate Ethical Issues: There are many areas of cybersecurity that are not covered by laws which means that doing something technically legal may not still be the ethical thing to do. IT professionals organization have created codes of ethics for persons in the industry, below is a list of three organizations with codes of ethics.
The Cybersecurity Institute(CSI)
The Information Systems Security Association(ISSA)
The Association of Information Technology Professionals(AITP)