List of ways to protect your computing device from intrusion.
Keeping the Firewall On: Both software and hardware firewall on a router must be kept on and updated to prevent hackers from accessing your personal or company data.
Use Antivirus and Anti-spyware: This software are responsible for scanning your computer and incoming emails to locate and delete any virus or spyware. You must keep it up to date to protect your computer from the newest malicious software.
Manage your operating system and Browser: Set your security settings on your computer or hardware at high or medium and update your browser and OS always. Regularly download and install the latest software patches and security updates from right vendors.
Protect Your Devices: Your computing devices must all be password locked to avoid unauthorized access. Stored information and confidential data must be encrypted in case they are stolen or lost. 
Wireless networks allow wifi enabled devices to gain access to networks by way of Service Set Identifier(SSID). Wireless routers can be protected by way of WPA2 encryption and wireless security even though they can still be vulnerable. This vulnerability can be exploited using Key Reinstallation Attacks (KRACK). A wired connection can mitigate this vulnerability.
The two most common types of encryption are Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), and Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA). The strongest one commonly available is WPA2
Using a password manager allows you store and encrypts all your different and complex passwords.
Do not use the same passwords for multiple accounts. Avoid using dictionary words, names that can be easily guessed, computer or account names and use special characters.
Using a paraphrase instead of a password for your computing device is better. In choosing a good paraphrase, choose a meaningful statement, add special characters and the longer the better.
 Encryption is the process of converting the information into a form where an unauthorized party cannot read it. Only a trusted, authorized person with the secret key or password can decrypt the data and access it in its original form. The encryption itself does not prevent someone from intercepting the data. Encryption can only prevent an unauthorized person from viewing or accessing the content.
 It is also important you back up your data using an external hard drive or cloud in case of any eventuality.
 The best way to deleting your data completely from your device is destroying the hard disk or device.
 A 2FA is the best way to secure accounts and system but that doesn't mean it cannot be hacked. One way it can be hacked is through the SMS method where a code is sent to the user phone number or an automated phone call, the attacker gain access to the victims phone number through sim swapping or contacting the carrier pretending to be the owner of the sim after getting enough information about the victim. It still remains a strong way to fight against cyber attacks and identity fraud.
 An example of 2FA is fingerprints, voice, face or retina, QR codes, specialized gadget, SMS sent to your mobile phone.
 Common Types of 2FA;
 SMS and Voice based 2FA: In this case, users provide phone numbers at the point of registration where single used code is sent via SMS or automated phone calls whenever they want to log in to their account. It has its challenges especially when the victim has a dead phone or out of network especially victims traveling abroad. Moreover, hackers have their way around it.
 Push Notification for 2FA: This method is mostly among Apple devices, where whenever there is a login, a notification is sent to all the users device with location as to where it is coming from but it needs data before it can function. This method help you spot phishing attack.
 Software tokens/Authenticator App/Time-based one time passcode(TOTP): This 2FA requires that an app is downloaded with any site compatible with it, then when users login their username and password, they are redirected to the app to find a software generated TOTP or software token. Examples of application for this authentication are; Google authenticator, Microsoft authenticator, Duo mobile and FreeOTP. The benefit of this method is that it does not need a mobile network and its disadvantage is the inconvenience of opening the app each time you want to login to a site or application.
 Hardware Token for 2FA: Its the oldest form of 2FA where a hardware token generates codes at intervals. The user inputs this codes. This type of 2FA is mostly used by businesses. A similar one called the U2F is being created by big tech and financial companies to secure accounts like Dropbox, Google and Github accounts, this is a small USB key you put on your keychain, whenever you want to login into your account from a nw computer you plug in the USB key and press a button on it, no codes required. The benefit of this hardware method is that it doesn't require an internet connection and its downside is that it is expensive to set up and maintain and the devices could go missing.
 Biometric 2FA: This is considered the most secured 2FA, in this case the user becomes the token, a users face, fingerprint, retina, or voice is only needed as the 2FA to prove their identity and gain access to the account. The benefit is that it only requires being yourself. The drawback is the privacy concerns around the storage of a users biometric data.
 We also have the Email 2FA that works like the SMS 2FA, where a code is sent to your email. This the least secure 2FA because of password vulnerability.
 Open Authorization(OAuth) is an open standard protocol that allows an end users credential to access third party application without exposing the user password. OAuth acts as the middleman to determine if user can access third party application even without third party application knowing user credentials.
Firewall: Hardware or software that prevents hackers from accessing your personal or company data.
Antivirus: A program that scans a computer for malicious software and deletes it
Spyware: Monitors online activities and collects personal information without permission
Virus: Destroys data and can slow down a computer
Secure the browser and operating system to use the latest software and security patches/updates
Shodan: a web based device scanner
Service Set Identifier (SSID) connect to a specific wireless network by the way of a network identifier