Cybersecurity professionals are best described as experts charged  with the protection of cyberspace. John McCumber is one of the early cybersecurity experts that developed a framework called the McCumber Cube or the Cybersecurity Cube. This cube looks like a Rubik's cube and is a tool used  when managing the protection of networks, domains and the internet. This cube consist of three dimensions which are;
The first dimension is known as the CIA Triad also referred to as the three principles of information security.
The second dimension of the cube consist of the Three states of information or data.
The third dimension of the cube identifies the expertise required to provide protection. These dimensions are often called the categories of cybersecurity safeguards. These are technology, policy and practices, and improving education, training and awareness in people. Cybersecurity professionals must use a range of different skills and disciplines available to them when protecting data and infrastructure in cyberspace.
The First Dimension are the foundational principles that identifies goals to protect cyberspace. These three principles are Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability(CIA). They provide focus and enable the cybersecurity expert to prioritize actions when protecting any networked system. They are referred to as the Security Principles and thus can be explained further as;
Confidentiality(Privacy) prevents the disclosure of information to unauthorized people, resources, or processes. Method to ensure this include; data encryption, authentication, and access control.
Integrity(Quality) refers to the accuracy, consistency, and trustworthiness of data. Methods used to ensure data integrity include; Hashing, data validation checks, data consistency checks, and access controls.
Availability ensures that information is accessible by authorized users when needed. method to ensure availability includes; system redundancy, system backups, increased system resiliency, equipment maintenance, up-to-date operating systems and software, and plans in place to recover quickly from unforeseen disasters. 
The second dimension is referred to as the Information States, this dimension focuses on the problems of protecting all of the states of data in the cyberspace. These states includes;
Transmission: Data in transit.
Storage: Data at rest or in storage
Processing: Data in process. Cybersecurity professionals are responsible for the safeguarding of data in all three states.
The third dimension defines the skill and discipline a cybersecurity professional can call upon to protect the cyberspace and they must do this while maintaining the right side of the law. These skills can be called Countermeasures and they are of three types which are;
Technology: These includes technologies, devices, and products available to protect information systems and fend off cyber criminals.
Policies and Practice: Cybersecurity professionals must build strong defense by establishing policies, procedures, and guidelines that enable the users of cyberspace to stay safe and follow good practices.
People: Users of cyberspace must also be knowledgeable about the threats of the cyberspace and establish a culture of learning and awareness.
Principles of Confidentiality:
Sensitive information is data protected from unauthorized access to safeguard an individual or an organization. To accomplish confidentiality without using encryption, tokenization is a substitution technique that can isolate data elements from exposure to other data systems, Tokenization can preserve the data format (its type and data length), which makes it useful for databases and card payment processing. Rights management covers both digital rights management (DRM) and information rights management (IRM). Both protect data from unauthorized access by using encryption, why DRM protects copyrighted digital material like music, films, or books, IRM is used with email and other files relevant to the activities and communications of an oranization. There are three types of sensitive information and they are;
Personal Information which entails an individual's Personally Identifiable Information(PII) and it includes; Social Security Number, Medical Records, Credit Card Numbers, and  Financial Records.
Business Information entails anything that poses a risk to the organization if discovered by the public or a competitor. These information can be; Trade secrets, Acquisition Plans, Financial Data and Customer Information.
Classified information are information belonging to a government body classified by its level of sensitivity. These sensitivity can be classified into four which are; Top Secret, Secret, Confidential, Restricted.
Access control defines a number of protection schemes that prevent unauthorized access to a computer, network, database, or other data resources.
The primary framework to Access control consist of three security services which are; Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting(AAA).
Authentication verifies the identity of a user to prevent unauthorized access. In this concept, the user is expected to provide any of the below; Something they know(such as a password), Something you have(such as token or card), Something they are(such as fingerprint). The most popular form of authentication is the use of password.
Authorization services determine which resources users can access, along with the operations that users can perform. This processes can be accomplished using the Access Control List(ACL), This list determines whether a user has certain access privileges once the user authenticates.
Accounting keeps track of what users do, including what they access, the amount of time they access resources, and any changes made. An example of a cybersecurity accounting is the website Norse; it shows attacks in real-time based on data collected as part of an accounting or tracking system.
Principles of Data Integrity:
Need For Data Integrity: The need for data integrity varies based on how an organization uses data. A financial institution assigns a higher importance to data integrity than a social media site, so is it with a health care organization.
Data integrity is of different levels and they are;
Critical Level comprises of Healthcare and Emergency services, in this case, All data is validated and tested, Data is verified to provide trustworthiness. Example include healthcare and financial records.
High Level comprises of Ecommerce and Analytics, in this case, All data is validated, data is checked to provide trustworthiness. Examples include organization databases.
Mid Level consist of Online Sales and Search engines. Here, Little verification is performed, Data not completely trustworthy, Data is collected with publicly posted forms.
Low Level consist of Blogs and personal posting sites. In this case, Data may not  be verified, low level of trust in content. Examples include public opinion and open contribution.
Integrity Check is a way to measure the consistency of a collection of data. This integrity check performs a process called the hash function and an example is a checksum. A checksum simply convert each piece of information to a value and sum the total. This checksums verifies the integrity of files, or string of characters, before and after they transfer from one device to another across a local network or the internet. Common hash functions include MD5, SHA-1, SHA-256, SHA-512.
Principle of Availability:
Data availability is the principle used to describe the need to maintain availability of information systems and services at all times. Access to information systems and services can be caused by Denial of Service(DoS), malicious attacks, Equipment failures and Natural Disasters.
High availability describes systems designed to avoid downtime. They ensure a level of performance for a higher than normal period. These systems include three design principles which are;
Eliminate Single Points of Failure: Identify all devices and components in a system that would result in a system failure if that device or component fails. Methods to eliminate single points of failures include; hot stand-by devices, redundant components, and multiple connections or pathways.
Provide for Reliable Crossover: Redundant power supplies, backup power systems and backup communications systems all provide for reliable crossover.
Detect Failures as They Occur: Active device and system monitoring detects many types of events including system and device failures, the monitoring systems also trigger the backup system in the case of a failure.
One of the most popular high availability practices is five nines(99.999%) and this means than downtime has less than 5.26 minutes per year. The three approaches to five nines are;
Standardized Systems: This provides for systems that use the same components. Parts inventories are easier to maintain and swapping components during an emergency is possible.
Shared Component Systems: Systems are built so that a backup system can totally replace one that failed.
Clustering: Multiple devices grouped together provide a service that appears to be a single entity to a user. If one device fails, the other devices remain available.
Ensuring Availability: Organizations can ensure availability by implementing the following;
Equipment Maintenance: Regular equipment maintenance can improve system uptime and these include; component replacement, cleaning and alignment.
OS and System Updates: System and OS should be updated on regular schedule. Cybersecurity professionals can subscribe to alerts that announce new update releases.
Backup Systems: Backup of organization data, configuration data and personal data ensures system availability and these backup system should be tested to ensure these systems work properly and that data can be recovered in the event of data loss.
Plan For Disasters: Disaster planning is a critical part of increasing system availability. Employees and customers should know how to respond to a disaster and cybersecurity team should practice response and test backup systems and also be familiar with procedures for restoring critical systems.
New Technology Implementations: Continuous evaluation and testing new technologies to counter new threats and attacks. Cybersecurity professionals are required to use new technologies, products and devices.
Monitor System: Continuous monitoring increase system availability and it should be done with real-time system information.
System Testing: All systems should be tested to find vulnerabilities and this testing includes port scans, vulnerability scans and penetration tests.
Types of Data Storage: Stored data are referred to as data at rest and is a type of storage device that retains the data when no user or process is using it. A storage device can be local(on a computing device) or centralized(on the network). Number of storage options includes;
Direct-Attached Storage(DAS) is a storage connected to a computer. Example; hard drive, flash drive etc. By default, systems are not set up to share direct-attached storage.
Redundant Array of Independent Disks(RAID) uses multiple hard drives in an array , which is a method of combining multiple disks so that the operating system sees them as a single disk. It provides improved performance and fault tolerance.
Network Attached Storage(NAS) is a storage device connected to a network that allows storage and retrieval of data from a centralized location by authorized network users. These devices are flexible and scalable, meaning administrators can increase the capacity as needed.
Storage Area Network(SAN) architecture is a network based storage system. SAN systems connect to the network using high-speed interfaces allowing improved performance and the ability to connect multiple servers to a centralized disk storage repository.
Cloud Storage is a remote storage option that uses space on a data center provider and is accessible from any computer with internet access. Example includes; Google Drive, icloud, and Dropbox.
Challenges of Protecting Stored Data: Direct-Attache Storage(DAS) is one of the most difficult storage to be managed and controlled and it is vulnerable to malicious attacks on the local host. An organization should not store critical data on DAS devices.
Network storage systems offers a more secure option and they include; NAS, SAN, RAID. They provide greater performance and redundancy but they are more complicated to configure and manage. They handle more data therefore, posing more risk if the device fails. Its unique challenge includes; configuring, testing, and monitoring the system.
Methods of Transmitting Data: Transmission of data involves sending information from one device to another, there are numerous ways to transmit information between devices and they are;
Sneaker net: Using removable media to physically move data from one computer to another.
Wired Networks: Use of cables to transmit data. These cables include copper wire and fiber optic media and they can serve the Local Area Network(LAN) or even greater distance like the Wide Area Networks(WAN).
Wireless Networks: They use radio waves to transmit data, they are fast replacing wired networks because they are becoming faster and handle more bandwidth and they expand the number of guest.
Wired and wireless both use packets or data unit. Packets refers to a unit of data that travels between an origin and a destination on the network. Standard protocol like Internet Protocol(IP) and Hypertext Transfer Protocol(HTTP) define the structure and formation of data packets.
Challenges of Protecting Data In-Transit: This is one of the most challenging jobs of a cybersecurity professional. Some of these challenges and measures to counter them include;
Protecting Data Integrity: Data in transit can be altered by cyber criminals. Cybersecurity professionals can stop that by deploying data integrity systems to test the authenticity of transmitted data to counter these actions.
Protecting Data Availability: Data availability can be interrupted by rogue or unauthorized devices and these can be intercepted using mutual authentication system where the user authenticates the server and the server does same.
Protecting data confidentiality: Data in transit can be stolen, captured. Steps must be taken by cybersecurity professionals to counter these actions.
Forms of Data Processing and Computation: This third state of data in process refers to data during initial input, modification, computation or output.
Protection of data integrity starts with the initial input of data and the method to collect data includes data entry, scanning forms, file uploads, and data collected from sensors. And errors associated with input includes; data entry errors or disconnected, malfunctioning, or inoperable system sensors, mislabeling and incorrect or mismatched data formats.
Data modification refers to changes to the original data. Examples are encoding/decoding, compression/decompression and encryption/decryption. Malicious code also results in data corruption.
Data corruption also occurs during the data output process. Data output refers to outputting data to printers, electronic displays or directly to other devices. Examples of output data corruption include the incorrect use of data delimiters, incorrect communication configurations, and improperly configured printers.
Challenges of Data In-Process: Protecting data during processing requires well designed systems. Cybersecurity professionals design policies and procedures that require testing, maintaining, and updating systems to keep them operating with the least amount of errors. Counter measures include; Access control, Data validation, and Data Duplication.
Software-Based Technology Safeguards: Software safeguards include programs and services that protect operating systems, databases, and other services operating on workstations, portable devices, and servers.
There are several software-based technologies used to safeguard an organization’s assets and they include:
Software firewalls control remote access to a system.
Network and port scanners discover and monitor open ports on a host or server.
Protocol analyzers, or signature analyzers, are devices that collect and examine network traffic. They identify performance problems, detect misconfigurations, identify misbehaving applications, establish baseline and normal traffic patterns, and debug communication problems.
Vulnerability scanners are computer programs designed to assess weaknesses on computers or networks.
Host-based intrusion detection systems (IDS) examine activity on host systems only. An IDS generates log files and alarm messages when it detects unusual activity. A system storing sensitive data or providing critical services is a candidate for host-based IDS.
Hardware-Based Technology Safeguards:There are several hardware-based technologies used to safeguard an organization’s assets and they are;
Firewall appliances block unwanted traffic. Firewalls contain rules that define the traffic allowed into and out of a network.
Dedicated Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) detect signs of attacks or unusual traffic on a network and send an alert.
Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS) detect signs of attacks or unusual traffic on a network, generate an alert and take corrective actions.
Content filtering services control access and transmission of objectionable or offensive content.
Network-Based Technology Safeguards: There are networked based technologies used to protect the organization's assets and they include;
Virtual Private Network (VPN) is a secure virtual network that uses the public network (i.e., the Internet). The security of a VPN lies in the encryption of packet content between the endpoints that define the VPN.
Network access control (NAC) requires a set of checks before allowing a device to connect to a network. Some common checks include up-to-data antivirus software or operating system updates installed.
Wireless access point security includes the implementation of authentication and encryption.
Cloud-Based Technology Safeguards: Cloud-based technologies shift the technology component from the organization to the cloud provider. The three main cloud computing services include:
Software as a Service (SaaS) allows users to gain access to application software and databases. Cloud providers manage the infrastructure. Users store data on the cloud provider’s servers.
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) provides virtualized computing resources over the Internet. The provider hosts the hardware, software, servers, and storage components.
Platform as a Service (PaaS) provides access to the development tools and services used to deliver the applications.
Cloud service providers have extended these options to include IT as a Service (ITaaS), which provides IT support for IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS service models. In the ITaaS model, an organization contracts with the Cloud provider for individual or bundled services. Cloud service providers use virtual security appliances that run inside a virtual environment with a pre-packaged, hardened operating system running on virtualized hardware.
Implementing Cybersecurity Education and Training:  A security awareness program is extremely important for an organization. An employee may not be purposefully malicious but just unaware of what the proper procedures are. There are several ways to implement a formal training program and they are;
Onboarding New Employees: Make security awareness training a part of the employee’s onboarding process.
Security Awareness: Tie security awareness to job requirements or performance evaluations.
In Person Training: Conduct in-person training sessions.
Online Training: Complete online courses.
Security awareness should be an ongoing process since new threats and techniques are always on the horizon.
Establishing a culture awareness is an ongoing effort that requires the leadership of upper management and the commitment of all users and employees and these awareness programs depend on the organization's environment and the level of threat. These culture begins with establishing policies and procedures by management.
A security policy is a set of security objectives for a company that includes rules of behavior for users and administrators and specifies system requirements.Security policies inform users, staff, and managers of an organization’s requirements for protecting technology and information assets. A security policy also specifies the mechanisms needed to meet security requirements
One of the most common security policy components is an Acceptable Use Policy (AUP). This component defines what users can and cannot do on the various system components. The AUP should be as explicit as possible to avoid misunderstanding. For example, an AUP lists specific websites, newsgroups, or bandwidth intensive applications that users cannot access using company computers or the company network. 
A security policy includes;
Identification and Authentication Policies, Password Policies, Acceptable Use policies, Remote access policies, Network maintenance policies, Incident handling policies.
Standards documents provide the technologies that specific users or programs need in addition to any program requirements or criteria that an organization must follow. This helps IT staff improve efficiency and simplicity in design, maintenance, and troubleshooting.
Guidelines are a list of suggestions on how to do things more efficiently and securely. They are similar to standards, but are more flexible and are not usually mandatory. Guidelines define how standards are developed and guarantee adherence to general security policies.
Guideline are available at; National Institute of Standards and Technology(NIST)-computer security resource center, National Security Agency(NSA) Security configuration guides.
Procedure documents are longer and more detailed than standards and guidelines. Procedure documents include implementation details that usually contain step-by-step instructions and graphics.
Cybersecurity Domains:
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO)/International Electro-technical Commission (IEC) developed a comprehensive framework to guide information security management. 
ISO/IEC 27000 is an information security standard published in 2005 and revised in 2013. ISO publishes the ISO 27000 standards. Even though the standards are not mandatory, most countries use them as a de facto framework for implementing information security. The ISO 27000 standards describe the implementation of a comprehensive Information Security Management System (ISMS). An ISMS consists of all of the administrative, technical and operational controls to keep information safe within an organization.
Cybersecurity Domain consist of twelve(12) domains and they serve as a common basis for developing organizational security standards and effective security management practices. They are;
Risk management: It determines the quantitative and qualitative value of risk related to a specific situation or recognized threat.
Security policy: A document that addresses the constraints and behaviors of members of an organization and often specifies how data can be accessed and what data is accessible by whom.
Organization of Information Security: This is the governance model set out by an organization for information security.
Asset Management: This is an inventory of and classification scheme for information assets.
Human Resources Security: This addresses security procedures relating to employees joining, moving within and leaving an organization.
Physical and Environmental Security: Ths describes the protection of the computer facilities within an organization.
Communications and operations Management:This describes the management of technical security controls in systems and networks.
Information Systems Acquisition, Development and Maintenance: This describes the integration of security into applications.
Access Control: This describes the restriction of access rights to networks, systems, applications, functions, and data.
Information Security Incident Management: This describes how to anticipate and respond to information security breaches.
Business Continuity Management: This describes the protection, maintenance, and recovery of business critical processes and systems.
Compliance: This describes the process of ensuring conformance with information security policies, standards, and regulations.
The twelve domains consist of control objectives defined in the 27001 part of the standard. The control objectives define the high-level requirements to implement a comprehensive ISM. An organization’s management team uses the ISO 27001 control objectives to define and publish the organization’s security policies. Control objectives provide a checklist to use during security management audits. Many organizations need to pass an ISMS audit in order to earn a designation of ISO 27001 compliant.
Certification and compliance provide confidence for two organizations that need to trust each other’s confidential data and operations. Compliance and security audits prove that organizations are continuously improving their information security management system.
The ISO/IEC 27002 defines information security management system controls. Controls are more detailed than objectives. Control objectives tell the organization what to do. Controls define how to accomplish the objective.
Controls are not mandatory, but they are widely accepted and adopted.
Controls must maintain vendor-neutrality to avoid the appearance of endorsing a specific product or company.
Controls are like guidelines. This means that there can be more than one way to comply with the objective.
The ISO 27001 control objectives serve as a checklist. The first step an organization takes is to determine if these control objectives are applicable to the organization. Most organizations generate a document called the Statement of Applicability (SOA). The SOA defines which control objectives that the organization needs to use.
Industries places greater emphasis on either confidentiality, integrity or availability depending on the type of industry.
Different groups within an organization may be responsible for data in each of the various states. For example, the network security group is responsible for data during transmission. Programmers and data entry people are responsible for data during processing. The hardware and server support specialists are responsible for stored data.
The ISO 27001 control objectives relate directly to the organization’s cybersecurity policies, procedures and guidelines which upper management determines. The ISO 27002 controls provide technical direction. For example, upper management establishes a policy specifying the protection of all data coming in to or out of the organization.
Patches Management: Patches are code updates that prevent a new virus, worm, or other malware from making a successful attack. Patches and upgrades are often combined into a service pack. As a cybersecurity professional, it’s good practice to test a patch before deploying it throughout the organization. A patch management tool can be used to manage patches locally instead of using the vendor’s online update service. An automated patch service provides administrators with a more control rather than waiting for patches to download and its benefits are that administrators can approve or decline updates, Administrators can force the update of systems on a specific date, Administrators can obtain reports on the update needed by each system, there is no need for each computer to connect to the vendor's service to download patches, instead it gets the verified update from a local server and users cannot disable or circumvent updates.  proactive approach to patch management provides network security while helping to prevent ransomware and other threats.
Endpoint Security: A host-based security solution is a software application that runs on a local device (or endpoint) to protect it. The software works with the operating system to help prevent attacks.
Host-Based Firewalls: A host based firewalls runs on a device to restrict incoming and outgoing network activity for that device. It can allow or deny traffic between the device and the network. An example is the windows firewall installed by default during windows installation, is an example of software firewall. You can control the type of data sent to and from the device by opening or blocking ports.
Host Intrusion Detection System(HIDS): HIDS software is installed on a device or server to monitor suspicious activity. It monitors system calls and file system access to detect malicious requests, it can also monitor configuration information about the device that is held in te system registry. HIDS stores all log data locally and is host specific, meaning it cannot monitor network traffic that does not reach the host system.
Host Intrusion Prevention System(HIPS): HIPS is software that monitors a device for known attacks and anomalies or finds red flags by assessing the actual protocols in packets, if it detects malicious activity, the HIPS tool can send you an alarm, log the malicious activity,  reset connection and or drop the packets.
Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR): EDR is an integrated security solution that continously monitors and collects data from an endpoint device. It responds on any threats it detects while analyzing. EDR can block against threats and find threat as well in the device.
Data Loss Prevention(DLP): DLP tools provides a centralized way to ensure that sensitive data is not lost, misused, or accessed by unauthorized users.
Next-Generation Firewall(NGFW): NGFW is a network security device that combines a traditional firewall with other network device filtering functions
Host Encryption: The Windows Encrypting File System (EFS) feature allows users to encrypt files, folders or an entire hard drive. Full-disk encryption (FDE) encrypts the entire contents of a drive (including temporary files and memory). Microsoft Windows uses BitLocker for FDE. To use BitLocker, the user needs to enable a Trusted Platform Module (TPM) in the BIOS. A TPM is a specialized chip on the motherboard that stores information about the host system, such as encryption keys, digital certificates, and system integrity measurements. When enabled, BitLocker can use the TPM chip. Similarly, BitLocker To Go is a tool that encrypts removable drives. It does not use a TPM chip, but still encrypts the data, requiring a password to decrypt it.
Boot Integrity: Boot integrity ensures that the system can be trusted and has not been altered while the operating system loads. Firmware — software instructions about basic computer functions — is stored on a small memory chip on the motherboard. The basic input/output system (BIOS) is the first program that runs when you turn on the computer. Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI), a newer version of BIOS, defines a standard interface between the operating system, firmware and external devices. A system that uses UEFI is preferred over one that uses BIOS because a UEFI system can run in 64-bit mode.
Secure Boot is a security standard to ensure that a device boots using trusted software. When a computer system boots, the firmware checks the signature of each piece of boot software, including UEFI firmware drivers, UEFI applications and the operating system. If the signatures are valid, the system boots, and the firmware gives control to the operating system.
Measured Boot provides stronger validation than Secure Boot. Measured Boot measures each component starting with the firmware through to the boot start drivers, and stores the measurements in the TMP chip to create a log. The log can be tested remotely to verify the boot state of the client. Measured Boot can identify untrusted applications trying to load, and it also allows antimalware to load earlier.
Apple System Security Features: Apple provides system hardware and macOS security features that offer robust endpoint protection. The features include the following;
Security-focused hardware: The hardware platform has enhanced security features such as a special security processor, boot integrity, and a dedicated AES encryption engine. These features are included in a special system on a chip called the Secure Enclave. 
Encrypted Storage: Apple Data Protection and FileVault data storage encryption are supported by the hardware-based AES encryption engine. This enables encryption and decryption of files as they are written or read without exposing encryption keys to the main CPU, operating system, or running applications.
Secure boot: The Boot ROM protects low-level hardware and only allows genuine and unaltered Apple OS software to run.
Secure biometric data: Biometric authentication data is processed in the security hardware system. This keeps it segregated from the OS and running application software, including malware.
Find My Mac: Find My Mac helps find lost or stolen macOS devices through its location tracking function. It also enables remote device locking and storage erasing if critical data is at risk.
XProtect: XProtect antimalware technology prevents the execution of malware through signature-based malware detection. It also alerts users to the existence of malware and provides the option to remove detected malware files.
Malware Removal Tool (MRT): The Malware Removal Tool (MRT) detects and removes existing malware infections when detection rules are automatically updated by Apple. It also monitors for malware infections at system restart and user login.
Gatekeeper: Gatekeeper ensures that only authentic, digitally-signed software that has been created by an Apple-notarized software developer is permitted to be installed.
Physical Protection of Devices: To physically protect computer equipment we need to Use cable locks to secure devices, Keep telecommunication rooms locked, Use security cages (Faraday cages) around equipment to block electromagnetic fields. A cipher lock is another door lock that can be used because it uses buttons that are pressed in a given sequence to open the door. It can be programmed so that a user’s code may only work during certain days or times. It can also keep a record of when the door opened, and the code used to open it. A Radio frequency identification(RFID) systems uses radio waves to identify and track objects. RFID tags can be attached to any item that an organization wants to track. The tags contain an integrated circuit that connects to an antenna. RFID tags are small and require very little power, so they do not need a battery to exchange information with a reader. RFID can help automate asset tracking, or wirelessly lock, unlock, or configure electronic devices. Contactless credit cards use RFID technology.
Endpoint Threats: Endpoint in network security are defined as hosts on the network that can access and can be accessed by other hosts on the network. Endpoint includes computers and servers. The top 3 endpoint threats experienced currently are ransomware, remote workers, and limited visibility.
Endpoint Security: Protecting endpoint devices from outside threats requires a hardened router providing VPN services, a firewall like Adaptive Security Appliance(ASA), an Intrusion Prevention System(IPS) and an Authentication, Authorization and Accounting(AAA) services server. It is also important to protect the internal Local Area Network(LAN) and here are the two elements to secure which are endpoints like laptops, desktops, printers, servers and IP phones. The second element to protect is the network infastructure and this includes; switches, wireless devices, ip telephony devices.
Host-Based Malware Protection: We have software that function as firewalls, antimalware and antivirus software for host-based devices. The malware protection includes;
Antivirus/Antimalware softwre: This is software that is installed on a host to detect and mitigate viruses and malware. Examples are Windows Defender Virus & Threat Protection, Cisco AMP for Endpoints, Norton Security, McAfee, Trend Micro, and others. Antimalware programs may detect viruses using three different approaches:
Signature-based - This approach recognizes various characteristics of known malware files.
Heuristics-based - This approach recognizes general features shared by various types of malware.
Behavior-based - This approach employs analysis of suspicious behavior.
Host-based antivirus protection is also known as agent-based. Agent-based antivirus runs on every protected machine. Agentless antivirus protection performs scans on hosts from a centralized system. Agentless systems have become popular for virtualized environments in which multiple OS instances are running on a host simultaneously. Agentless antivirus for virtual hosts involves the use of a special security virtual appliance that performs optimized scanning tasks on the virtual hosts. An example of this is VMware’s vShield.
Host-based Firewall: This software is installed on a host. It restricts incoming and outgoing connections to connections initiated by that host only. Some firewall software can also prevent a host from becoming infected and stop infected hosts from spreading malware to other hosts. This function is included in some operating systems. For example, Windows includes Windows Defender Firewall with Advanced Security, Linux includes the linux iptables and TCP wrappers tools.
Host-Based Security Suites: These host-based security suites include antivirus, anti-phishing, safe browsing, Host-based intrusion prevention system, and firewall capabilities. These various security measures provide a layered defense that will protect against most common threats. In addition to the protection functionality provided by host-based security products is the telemetry function. Most host-based security software includes robust logging functionality that is essential to cybersecurity operations. Some host-based security programs will submit logs to a central location for analysis. An example is the AV-TEST.
Network-Based Malware Protection: New security architectures for the borderless network address security challenges by having endpoints use network scanning elements. These devices provide many more layers of scanning than a single endpoint possibly could. Network-based malware prevention devices are also capable of sharing information among themselves to make better informed decisions. Examples of devices and techniques that implement host protections at the network level are;
Cisco Secure Endpoint - This provides endpoint protection from viruses and malware.
Cisco Secure Email - This provides filtering of SPAM and potentially malicious emails before they reach the endpoint. An example is the Cisco ESA.
Cisco Umbrella - This uses DNS requests to provide filtering of websites and blocklisting to prevent hosts from reaching dangerous locations on the web. Cisco Umbrella provides control over how users access the internet and can enforce acceptable use policies, control access to specific sites and services, and scan for malware.
Network Admission Control (NAC) - This permits only authorized and compliant systems to connect to the network.
Firewalls: Is a system or groups of systems that enforces an access control policy between networks. It allows traffic from any external address to the web server, it allows traffic to File Transfer Protocol(FTP) server, it allows traffic to Simple Mail Transfer Protocol(SMTP) server and it allows traffic to internal Internet Messaging Access Protocol(IMAP) server. It adenies all inbound traffic with network addresses matching internal-registered IP addresses, it denies all inbound traffic to server from external addresses, it denies all inbound Internet Control Message Protocol(ICMP) echo request traffic, it denies all inbound Microsoft(MS) Active Directory queries, it denies allinbound traffic to Microsoft(MS) SQL server queries and it denies all Microsoft(MS) Domain local broadcasts.
Firewall properties includes;
Firewalls are resistant to network attacks.
Firewalls are the only transit point between internal corporate networks and external networks because all traffic flows through the firewall.
Firewalls enforce the access control policy.
Firewall Benefits includes;
They prevent the exposure of sensitive hosts, resources, and applications to untrusted users.
They sanitize protocol flow, which prevents the exploitation of protocol flaws.
They block malicious data from servers and clients.
They reduce security management complexity by off-loading most of the network access control to a few firewalls in the network.
Firewall Limitation Includes;
A misconfigured firewall can have serious consequences for the network, such as becoming a single point of failure.
The data from many applications cannot be passed over firewalls securely.
Users might proactively search for ways around the firewall to receive blocked material, which exposes the network to potential attack.
Network performance can slow down.
Unauthorized traffic can be tunneled or hidden as legitimate traffic through the firewall.
Types of Firewalls: Different firewalls have specific capabilities and it is important to use the right one for each situation.
Packet Filtering(stateless) Firewall: Packet filtering firewalls are usually part of a router firewall, which permits or denies traffic based on Layer 3 and Layer 4 information. They are stateless firewalls that use a simple policy table look-up that filters traffic based on specific criteria. For example, SMTP servers listen to port 25 by default. An administrator can configure the packet filtering firewall to block port 25 from a specific workstation to prevent it from broadcasting an email virus.
Stateful Firewall: Stateful firewalls are the most versatile and the most common firewall technologies in use. Stateful firewalls provide stateful packet filtering by using connection information maintained in a state table. Stateful filtering is a firewall architecture that is classified at the network layer. It also analyzes traffic at OSI Layer 4 and Layer 5.
Application Gateway Firewall: An application gateway firewall filters information at Layers 3, 4, 5, and 7 of the OSI reference model. Most of the firewall control and filtering is done in software. 
Next Generation Firewall(NGFW): They go beyond stateful firewalls by providing integrated intrusion pevention, Application awareness and control to see and block risky apps, Upgrade paths to include future information feeds, Techniques to address evolving security threats.
Other method of implementing firewalls includes;
Host-based firewall: A pc or server with firewall software running on it.
Transparent firewall - Filters IP traffic between a pair of bridged interfaces.
Hybrid firewall - A combination of the various firewall types. For example, an application inspection firewall combines a stateful firewall with an application gateway firewall.
Benefit of Packet Filtering(stateless) Firewall includes;
Packet filters implement simple permit or deny rule sets.
Packet filters have a low impact on network performance.
Packet filters are easy to implement, and are supported by most routers.
Packet filters provide an initial degree of security at the network layer.
Packet filters perform almost all the tasks of a high-end firewall at a much lower cost.
Limitations of packet filtering(stateless) firewall includes;
Packet filters are susceptible to IP spoofing. Threat actors can send arbitrary packets that meet ACL criteria and pass through the filter.
Packet filters do not reliably filter fragmented packets. Because fragmented IP packets carry the TCP header in the first fragment and packet filters filter on TCP header information, all fragments after the first fragment are passed unconditionally. Decisions to use packet filters assume that the filter of the first fragment accurately enforces the policy.
Packet filters use complex ACLs, which can be difficult to implement and maintain.
Packet filters cannot dynamically filter certain services. For example, sessions that use dynamic port negotiations are difficult to filter without opening access to a whole range of ports.
Packet filters are stateless, they examine each packet individually rather than in the context of the state of a connection.
Benefits and limitation of stateful Firewall:
Primary means of defense but no application layer inspection.
Strong packet filtering but limited tracking of stateless protocols.
Improved performance over packet filters but difficult to defend against dynamic port negotiation.
Defends against spoofing and DoS attacks but no authentication support.
Host-Based Firewalls: Host-based personal firewalls are standalone software programs that control traffic entering or leaving a computer. Host-based firewalls may use a set of predefined policies, or profiles, to control packets entering and leaving a computer. They also may have rules that can be directly modified or created to control access based on addresses, protocols, and ports. Host-based firewall applications can also be configured to issue alerts to users if suspicious behavior is detected. They can then offer the user the ability to allow an offending application to run or to be prevented from running in the future. One approach to intrusion prevention is the use of distributed firewalls. Distributed firewalls combine features of host-based firewalls with centralized management. The management function pushes rules to the hosts and may also accept log files from the hosts.
Examples of Host-based firewalls are:
Windows Defender Firewall normally used by windows and uses a profile-based approach to firewall functionality. Access to public networks is assigned the restrictive Public firewall profile. The Private profile is for computers that are isolated from the internet by other security devices, such as a home router with firewall functionality. The Domain profile is the third available profile. It is chosen for connections to a trusted network, such as a business network that is assumed to have an adequate security infrastructure. Windows Firewall has logging functionality and can be centrally managed with customized group security policies from a management server such as System Center 2012 Configuration Manager.
iptables: This is an application that allows Linux system administrators to configure network access rules that are part of the Linux kernel Netfilter modules.
nftables: The successor to iptables, nftables is a Linux firewall application that uses a simple virtual machine in the Linux kernel. Code is executed within the virtual machine that inspects network packets and implements decision rules regarding packet acceptance and forwarding.
TCP wrappers: This is a rule-based access control and logging system for Linux. Packet filtering is based on IP addresses and network services.
Antimalware Programs includes;
Antivirus protection: This program continuously monitors for viruses. When a virus is detected, the user is warned, and the program attempts to quarantine or delete the virus.
Adware protection: This program continuously looks for programs that display advertising on your computer.
Phishing protection: This program blocks the IP addresses of known phishing websites and warns the user about suspicious sites.
Spyware protection: This program scans for keyloggers and other spyware.
Trusted and untrusted sources: This program warns you about unsafe programs about to be installed or unsafe websites before they are visited.
Wireless Security: Wireless attackers can be generated by outsiders, disgruntled employees and accidentally, and these threats can be through; Interception of data, Wireless intruders, Denial of service(DoS) attacks and Rogue APs.
Denial of Service(DoS) Attacks can be as a result of Improperly configured devices, Wireless intruders and accidental interference(WLAn are prone to be interferred by wireless devices like microwave ovens, cordless phones, etc ans the 2.4GHz is more prone than the 5GHz band). 
To minimize the risk of a DoS attack due to improperly configured devices and malicious attacks, harden all devices, keep passwords secure, create backups, and ensure that all configuration changes are incorporated off-hours. Monitor the WLAN for any accidental interference problems and address them as they appear. Because the 2.4 GHz band is used by other devices types, the 5 GHz should be used in areas prone to interference.
Rogue Access Points: A rogue AP is an AP or wireless router that has been connected to a corporate network without explicit authorization and against corporate policy. Once connected, the rogue AP can be used by an attacker to capture MAC addresses, capture data packets, gain access to network resources, or launch a man-in-the-middle attack.
To prevent the installation of rogue APs, organizations must configure wireless LAN controllers (WLCs) with rogue AP policies
Man-in-the-Middle Attack: In a man-in-the-middle (MITM), attack, the hacker is positioned in between two legitimate entities in order to read or modify the data that passes between the two parties. An example of a MITM attack is the Evil Twin AP where an attacker introduces a rogue AP and configures it with the same SSID as a legitimate AP. Wireless clients attempting to connect to a WLAN would see two APs with the same SSID offering wireless access. Those near the rogue AP find the stronger signal and most likely associate with it. User traffic is now sent to the rogue AP, which in turn captures the data and forwards it to the legitimate AP, Return traffic from the legitimate AP is sent to the rogue AP, captured, and then forwarded to the unsuspecting user. The attacker can steal the user’s passwords, personal information, gain access to their device, and compromise the system. MITM attack is often referred to as an on-path attack.
Defeating an attack like an MITM attack depends on the sophistication of the WLAN infrastructure and the vigilance in monitoring activity on the network. The process begins with identifying legitimate devices on the WLAN. To do this, users must be authenticated. After all of the legitimate devices are known, the network can be monitored for abnormal devices or traffic
Secure WLANS: To address the threats of keeping wireless intruders out and protecting data, two early security features were used and are still available on most routers and APs which are; SSID cloaking(SSID beacon frame is disabled) and MAC address filtering(An administrator manually permit or deny clients wireless access based on their physical MAC hardware address) but the best way to secure a wireless network is to use authentication and encryption sysytems
In authentication, we have the open and the shared key. In open authentication, it can only be used where security is of no concern, the client do not require a password to access the network, anyone can associate, this wireless access is usually free and in public places and the client has full responsibility of security, whereas in shared key we have four techniques available which is used to authenticate and encrypt data between a wireless client and Access point and they are;
Wired Equivalent Privacy(WEP): This is designed to secure wireless data with a static key.
Wi-FI Protected Access(WPA): This method uses the WEP but secures the data with much stronger Temporal Key Integrity Protocol(TKIP) encryption algorithm.
Wi-Fi Protected Access(WPA2): This uses the Advanced Encryption Standard(AES) for encryption, its currently considered the strongest encryption protocol and is the industry standard for securing wireless networks. We als have the WPA3 which uses the Protected Management Frames(PMF) but yet to be readily available. 
In encryption, the WPA and WPA2 standards use these protocols; 
The Temporal Key Integrity Protocol(TKIP) is used by WPA to provide support for legacy WLAN equipment. It makes use of WEP, but encrypts the Layer 2 payload using TKIP, and carries out a Message Integrity Check (MIC) in the encrypted packet to ensure the message has not been altered.
The Advanced Encryption Standard(AES) is used by WPA2 because is a far stronger method of encryption. It uses the Counter Cipher Mode with Block Chaining Message Authentication Code Protocol (CCMP) that allows destination hosts to recognize if the encrypted and non-encrypted bits have been altered.
Authenticating a Home User: The home routers have two choices of authentication which are the WPA and WPA2. The home router can either be personal or Enterprise. In personal, the home or small office network users authenticate using a pre-shared key(PSK) and clients authenticates with the wireless router using a pre-shared password, no special authentication server is required. 
Authenticating in the Enterprise: In enterprise network, it requires a Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service(RADIUS) authentication server. The device must be authenticated by the RADIUS server and then users must authenticate using 802.1X standard, which uses the Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) for authentication. The Enterprise security mode choice requires an Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) RADIUS server.
RADIUS Server IP address - This is the reachable address of the RADIUS server.
UDP port numbers - Officially assigned UDP ports 1812 for RADIUS Authentication, and 1813 for RADIUS Accounting, but can also operate using UDP ports 1645 and 1646
Shared key - Used to authenticate the AP with the RADIUS server.
The shared key is not a parameter that must be configured on a wireless client. It is only required on the AP to authenticate with the RADIUS server. User authentication and authorization is handled by the 802.1X standard, which provides a centralized, server-based authentication of end users.
The 802.1X login process uses EAP to communicate with the AP and RADIUS server. EAP is a framework for authenticating network access. It can provide a secure authentication mechanism and negotiate a secure private key which can then be used for a wireless encryption session using TKIP or AES encryption.
WPA3: WPA2 is no longer considered secure. WPA3, if available, is the recommended 802.11 authentication method. WPA3 includes four applications:
WPA3-Personal: In WPA2-Personal, threat actors can listen in on the “handshake” between a wireless client and the AP and use a brute force attack to try and guess the PSK. WPA3-Personal thwarts this attack by using Simultaneous Authentication of Equals (SAE), a feature specified in the IEEE 802.11-2016. The PSK is never exposed, making it impossible for the threat actor to guess.
WPA3-Enterprise: WPA3-Enterprise still uses 802.1X/EAP authentication. However, it requires the use of a 192-bit cryptographic suite and eliminates the mixing of security protocols for previous 802.11 standards. WPA3-Enterprise adheres to the Commercial National Security Algorithm (CNSA) Suite which is commonly used in high security Wi-Fi networks.
Open Networks: Open networks in WPA2 send user traffic in unauthenticated, clear text. In WPA3, open or public Wi-Fi networks still do not use any authentication. However, they do use Opportunistic Wireless Encryption (OWE) to encrypt all wireless traffic.
IoT Onboarding: Although WPA2 included Wi-Fi Protected Setup (WPS) to quickly onboard devices without configuring them first, WPS is vulnerable to a variety of attacks and is not recommended. Furthermore, IoT devices are typically headless, meaning they have no built-in GUI for configuration, and need an easy way to connect to the wireless network. The Device Provisioning Protocol (DPP) was designed to address this need. Each headless device has a hardcoded public key. The key is typically stamped on the outside of the device or its packaging as a Quick Response (QR) code. The network administrator can scan the QR code and quickly onboard the device. Although not strictly part of the WPA3 standard, DPP will replace WPS over time.
NB: The original 802.11 specification was designed to secure the data using the Rivest Cipher 4(RC4) encryption method with a static key