A domain is considered a place where there is control, authority or protection. Some web applications that have been able to create great Data domain includes; Google, Facebook, Linkedln, etc.
The Data collected within the internet is more than just the Data voluntarily given out by users. There are so many technologies that have been built to collect data ranging from weather trend, monitor oceans, behavior of human and animals and object in real time. New technologies such as Geospatial Information System(GIS) and Internet of Things(IoT) have emerged and they can track as much as the health of trees, up-to-date location of humans, vehicles, devices and materials. These data collected can save energy, improve efficiency and reduce safety risk. These data collected can also pose a big challenge in the future because if they get into the hands of cyber criminals, it will enable them gain access to every aspects of daily living.
Hacking started in the 1960s with phone freaking where various audio frequencies are used to manipulate phone systems. In mid 1980s, criminals used computer dial-up modems to connect computers to networks and used password cracking programs to gain access to data. But today, it has graduated to using malware and viruses as high tech weapons which is now beyond just stealing information. For most cyber criminals, their greatest motivation is finance.
Being a Cybersecurity Specialist opens you up for a High Earning Potential, Challenging Career, High Portable Career and Service to the Public. The more there is improve in technology advancement, the more it is vulnerable to attacks.
Thwarting CyberCriminals: Company, government and international organizations have begun to take coordinated actions to limit or fend off cyber criminals. Some of these organization includes;
The National Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures(CVE): This is a database that was developed to provide a public available database of all known vulnerability.
Early Warning System: These establishes early warning sensors and alert networks which warn individuals or organizations of potential attacks. An example of this is the Honeynet project. This is a non-profit project that investigates latest attacks and develops open source security tools.
Sharing Cyber Intelligence Information: Businesses, government agencies and countries now collaborate to share critical information about serious attacks to critical targets in other to prevent similar attacks in other places. An example of this is InfraGard; They are a program in partnership with FBI and the private sector, they are dedicated to sharing information and intelligence to prevent hostile cyber attacks.
Information Security Management(ISM) standard is established among national and international organizations. An example is the ISO/IEC 27000 standards; It provides a framework for implementing cybersecurity measures within an organization.
Enacting new laws to discourage cyber attacks and data breaches. These laws have severe penalties to punish cyber criminals caught carrying out illegal actions. An example of an organization that track laws enacted related to cyber security is the ISACA group. Their laws can address individual privacy to protection of intellectual property and an example of their laws includes; Cybersecurity Act, Federal Exchange Data Breach Notification Act and the Data Accountability and Trust Act.
Cybersecurity Professionals should recognize the threat that data poses if it is used against people. Threats and vulnerabilities are the main concern of cybersecurity professionals and two situations are especially critical. They are;
When a threat is the possibility that a harmful event, such as an attack will occur.
When a vulnerability makes a target susceptible to an attack.
Threat to Internet Services: Criminals use packet-sniffing tools to capture data streams over a network; they work by monitoring and recording all information coming across a network.
Domain Name Service(DNS): This is used to translate domain name into its numerical IP address. If a DNS server does not know an IP address, it asks another DNS server. With DNS spoofing or DNS cache poisoning, criminals introduce false data into DNS resolvers cache which exploits a weakness in the DNS and causes the DNS servers to redirect traffic for a specific domain to the criminal's computer instead of the legitimate owner.
Packet transports data across a network or the internet. Packet forgery or packet injection interferes with an established network communication by constructing packets to appear as if they are part of the communication. This process enables the criminal to hijack an authorized connection or denies an individual ability to use certain network services. It is also called man-in-the-middle attack.
Threat to Key Industry Sectors: A smart grid uses information to create an automated advanced energy delivery network. It is an advancement to the electrical generation and distribution system.Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition(SCADA)system is used to control and monitor industrial processes. Cyber-attacks can bring down or interrupt an entire industrial process just like in the case of Stuxnet attack.
Internet of Things(IoT) is the collection of technologies that enable the connection of various devices to the internet. They range from mobile devices, computers, television, refrigerator, music players, lighting bulbs, entertainment devices, motors, locks, etc. These devices are operated remotely and thus requires the number of networks requiring protection. This has also led to expanded storage capacity and storage services offered through the cloud and virtualization and has led to the exponential growth of data. This has led to a new area of interest in technology and business called Big Data.
The Impact of Big Data: Big data is the result of data sets that are large and complex, making traditional data processing applications inadequate.
Big data poses both challenges and opportunities based on three dimensions:
The volume or amount of data
The velocity or speed of data
The variety or range of data types and sources.
Algorithm attacks can track system self-reporting data, like how much energy a computer is using, and use that information to select targets or trigger false alerts. They can also disable a computer by forcing it to use memory or by overworking its central processing unit. They are more devious because they exploit designs used to improve energy savings, decrease system failures, and improve efficiencies.
Federated Identity Management refers to multiple enterprises that let their users use the same identification credentials gaining access to the networks of all enterprises in the group. The goal of federal identity management is to share identity information automatically across castle boundaries and for individuals, it is a single sign-on to the web. Moreover, Social security numbers, names, and addresses may allow identity thieves the opportunity to steal this information from a partner to perpetrate fraud. The most common way to protect federal identity is to tie login ability to an authorized device.
Telephone Denial of Service(TDoS) is an attack where phone calls are made towards a target telephone network tying up the system and preventing legitimate calls from getting through. This calls could be target to emergency lines making it unavailable for legitimate users.
The National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework: This framework categorizes the cybersecurity work into seven categories and they are;
Operate and Maintain: Specialty areas responsible for providing support, administration, and maintenance required to ensure IT system performance and security.
Protect and Defend: Specialty responsible for identification, analysis, and mitigation of threats to internal systems and networks.
Investigate: Specialty areas responsible for investigation of cyber events and/or cyber crimes involving IT resources, networks, and digital evidence.
Collect and Operate: Specialty areas responsible for denial and deception operations and the collection of cybersecurity information that may be used to develop intelligence.
Analyze: Specialty areas responsible for highly specialized review and evaluation of incoming cybersecurity information to determine if it is useful for intelligence.
Oversight and Development: Specialty areas responsible for providing leadership, management, and direction to conduct cybersecurity work effectively.
Securely Provision: Specialty areas responsible for conceptualizing, designing, and building secure IT systems.
Network Security Organizations:
Computer Emergency Response Team(CERT): funded federally by the U.S to work with the internet community in detecting and resolving computer security incidents.
SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security(SANS): They develop security courses, flash security alert with internet early warning system.
MITRE: The mitre corporation maintains list of common vulnerabilities and exposures(CVE) used by prominent security organizations.
Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams(FIRST) is a security organization that brings together a variety of computer security incident response teams from government, commercial, and educational organizations to foster cooperation and coordination in information sharing, incident prevention and rapid reaction.
Information Systems Security(InfoSysSec) is a network security organization that hosts a security news portal, providing the latest breaking news pertaining to alerts, exploits and vulnerabilities
International Information Systems Security Certification Consortium(ISC)^2. It provides vendor-neutral education products and career services in more than 135 countries, to over 75,000 certified industry professionals. They help to elevate information security to the public domain, and supporting and developing network security professionals around the world including information security certifications and Certified Information Systems Security Professional(CISSP).
Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center(MS-ISAC): This is the focal point for cyber threat prevention, protection, response and recovery for the nation's State, Local, Tribal, and Territorial(SLTT) governments. They provide real time monitoring, early cyber threat warnings and advisories, vulnerability identification and mitigation and incident response.
Industry Certifications: This certifications provide proof of skills, and knowledge level and they include;
CompTIA Security+: This certifies the competence of IT administrators in information assurance. It covers the most important principles for securing a network and managing risk, including concerns associated with cloud computing.
EC-Council Certified Ethical Hacker(CEH): Its an intermediate level certification that certifies that specialist holding this credentials possesses the skills and knowledge for various hacking practices. These specialist use the same skills and techniques used by the cyber criminals to identify system vulnerabilities and access points into systems.
SANS GIAC Security Essentials(GSEC): Its an entry level certification for cybersecurity specialist that can demonstrate that they understand security terminology and concepts and have the skills for hands-on security roles.
(ISC)^2(CISSP): It is a certification for cybersecurity specialists with a great deal of technical and managerial experience and is a globally recognized industry certification in the security field.
ISACA Certified Information Security Manager(CISM): This certifies for those with advanced skills in security risk management.
How to Become a Cybersecurity Expert: The following recommendations should be followed tenaciously;
Study: Learn the basics by completing courses in IT, be a life-long learner. Cybersecurity is an ever changing field, therefore specialist must keep up.
Pursue Certifications: Industry and company sponsored certifications from organizations such as Microsoft and Cisco prove that one possess the knowledge needed to seek employment as a cybersecurity specialist.
Pursue Internships: Seeking out internship programs will help a student to opportunities down the road.
Join Professional Organizations: Join computer security organizations, attend meetings and conferences, and join forums and blogs to gain knowledge from experts.
Fully Qualified Domain Name(FQDN): Is the complete address of an internet host or computer. It provides its exact location within the domain name system (DNS) by specifying the hostname, domain name and top-level domain (TLD).