Most modern attacks are considered blended attacks and these attacks are called blended because the attackers use multiple techniques to infiltrate and attack a system, when an attack cannot be prevented, it is the job of the cybersecurity professional to reduce the impact.
Security vulnerability is any kind of software or hardware defect.
An exploit is a program written to take advantage of a vulnerability.
An attack is the act of using an exploit against a vulnerability. And the goal of an attack is to have access to the system, the data it hosts or to a specific source.
Software vulnerability are usually introduced by errors in the operating system or application code. To avoid this, always verify the integrity of the downloaded operating system and limit the physical access of equipment to authorized personnel.
The goal of software updates is to stay current and avoid exploitation of vulnerabilities
Hardware vulnerability are often introduced by hardware design flaws. This vulnerability are specific to device models and are not generally exploit through random compromising attempts. An example of a design flaw exploit is Rowhammer, it was created as a result pf rewriting memory in the same address and its exploit allows data to be retrieved from nearby address memory cells, even if the cells are protected. Hardware exploit are more common in highly targeted attacks. Traditional malware protection and a physical security are sufficient protection for the users. 
Categories of Software vulnerability;
Buffer overflow: Buffers are memory areas allocate to an application. This vulnerability occurs when data is written beyond the limits of a buffer. By changing data beyond the boundaries of a buffer, the application accesses memory allocated to other processes thereby leading to system crash, data compromise, or provide escalation of privileges.
Non-Validated input: Programs works with data input. When data coming into a program has malicious content, it forces the program to work in an unintended way.
Race Conditions: A race condition becomes a source of vulnerability when the required ordered or timed events do not occur in the correct order or proper timing.
Weakness in security Practices: Systems and sensitive data can be protected through techniques such as authentication,authorization, and encryption. Developers should not try to create their own security algorithm because it will likely introduce vulnerability. It is advised they use security libraries that have already created, tested and verified.
Access Control problems:  Access control is the process of controlling who does what and ranges from managing physical access to equipment to dictating who has access to a resource, such as a file, and what they can do with it, such as read or change the file. Many security vulnerabilities are created by the improper use of access controls. Access controls can be overcome once the attacker has physical access to the target equipment. To protect machines, physical access must be restricted and encryption techniques must be used to protect data from being stolen or corrupted.
Malware is any code that can be used to steal data, bypass access controls, or cause harm to, or compromise a system.
Types of Malware:
Spyware: This a malware designed to spy on the user. They include; activity trackers, keystroke collection, and data capture. They attack by modifying security settings. They operate by bundling itself with legitimate software or with trojan horses.
Adware: They are advertisement supported software designed to automatically deliver advertisement. It is often installed with some versions of software and it is common for it to come with spyware.
Backdoor: This type of malware is used to gain unauthorized access by bypassing the normal authentication procedures to access a system. As a result, hackers can gain remote access to resources within an application and issue remote system commands. A backdoor works in the background and is difficult to detect, it continues to give cybercriminals access to a system even if the organization has fixed the original vulnerability used to attack the system. Example of backdoor programs includes; Netbus and back Orifice.
Bot: It is a malware designed to automatically perform action usually online, most of them are harmless but one malicious one is the botnets. When computers are infected with bots, they quietly wait for commands provided by the attacker.
Ransomware: This malware is designed to hold a computer system or the data it contains captive until a payment is made. Some other versions of ransomware is to take advantage of system vulnerability to lock down the system. It is usually done by encrypting data in the computer with a key unknown to the user and it is spread by a downloaded file or software vulnerability.
Scareware: This is a malware designed to persuade a user to take specific action out of fear. Scareware forges pop-up windows that resemble operating system dialogue windows. These windows convey forged messages stating the system is at risk or needs the execution of a specific program to return to normal operation. In reality, no problems were assessed or detected and if the user agrees and clears the mentioned program to execute, his or her system will be infected with malware.
Rootkit: This malware is designed to modify the operating system to create a backdoor. Attackers use the backdoor to access the system remotely. Most rootkits take advantage of software vulnerabilities to perform privilege escalation and modify system files. It is also common for rootkits to modify system forensics and monitoring tools, making them very hard to detect. Often, a computer infected by a rootkit must be wiped and reinstalled.
Virus: A virus is a malicious executable code attached to other executable files. Most virus require end user activation and can activate at a specific time or date. They can mutate to avoid detection and most of them are spread by USB drives, optical disks, network shares or email.
Trojan horse: A trojan horse is a malware that carries out a malicious operation under the guise of a desired operation. They are found in image files, audio files or games. It binds itself to non-executable files.
Worms: They are malicious codes that replicate themselves by independently exploiting vulnerabilities in networks. Unlike virus, worm can run by themselves, they no longer require user participation. They share similar pattern and have an enabling vulnerability and they all contain a payload.
Man in the Middle (MITM)(On-Path Attacks): This allows attackers to take control over a device without the users knowledge, it intercepts and capture user information before relaying it to its intended destination. They are mostly used to steal financial information and many malware and technique exist to provide attackers with MITM capabilities.
Man in the mobile (MITMO): A variation of man in the middle, its an attack used to take control over a mobile device, when infected, the mobile device is instructed to exfiltrate user-sensitive information and send it to the attackers. An example of exploit is Zeus, it allows attackers to capture the two step verification SMS messages sent to user.
Symptoms of Malware:
Increase in CPU usage
Decrease in computer speed
Computer freezes or crashes often
There is decrease in the browsing speed
Unexplainable problems with network connection
Files are modified
Files are deleted
There is a presence of unknown files, programs or desktop icons.
There are unknown processes running
Programs are turning off or reconfiguring themselves
Emails is being sent without the users knowledge or consent.
Methods of Infiltration:
Social Engineering: Its an access attack that attempts to manipulate individuals into performing actions or divulging confidential information. Social engineers often rely on people's willingness to be helpful but also prey on people's weaknesses.
Types of social Engineering attacks:
Pretexting: This when an attacker calls an individual and lies to them in an attempt to gain access to privileged data.
Tailgating: This is when an attacker quickly follows an authorized person into a secure location.
Something for Something (Quid pro quo): This is when an attacker request something from an individual in exchange for a free gift.
Wi-Fi Password Cracking: It is a process of discovering the password of a wireless network.
Techniques to Wifi password cracking;
Social engineering: A process where an attacker manipulates a person who knows the password to provide it.
Brute-force Attack: It is a situation where an attacker tries several possible password in an attempt to guess the password. This attack usually involves a word-list file, its a text file containing a list of words taken from the dictionary and a program is used to try possible combination. Some few brute-force tools include; Ophcrack,LOphtCrack, THC Hydra, RAinbowCrack and Medusa.
Other forms of common password security attacks includes;
Password Spraying: This is an attempt to gain access to a system by spraying a few commonly used password across a large number of accounts. This technique allows perpetrators to remain undetected as they avoid frequent account lockouts.
Dictionary Attacks: A hacker tries every word in a dictionary or a list of commonly used words as a password in an attempt to break into a password-protected account.
Rainbow Attacks: A rainbow table is a large dictionary of precomputed hashes and the password from which they are calculated. A rainbow compares the hash of a password with those stored in the rainbow table.
Traffic Interception: Plain text or unencrypted passwords can be easily read by other humans and machines by intercepting communications.
Network sniffing: By listening and capturing packet sent on the network, an attacker might discover a password if it is sent unencrypted and even if it is encrypted it can be cracked using a password cracking tool.
Phishing: Its a situation where a malicious group sends a fraudulent email in disguise to be from a legitimate and trusted source. The link attached to the email sends the user to a fake site asking for their personal information or it may install a virus.
Spear Phishing is a kind of phishing that is targeted to a particular victim, and is mostly done when a research has been done on the persons interest.
Vulnerability Exploitation is a common method of infiltration where attackers scan computers to gain access to information about them. This information is gathered using either port scanner or social engineering. The goal is to get as much information about the target computer. When information has been gathered, then the attacker looks for a known vulnerability specific to that information. After which he looks for an exploit used for that information, if there is none, he considers creating his own exploit.
A WHOIS tool is a public internet database containing information about domain name and their registrant.
NMAP is a port scanner tool used to learn about services running on that computer.
Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) is another method of infiltration which consist of a multi phase, long term, stealthy and advanced operation against a specific target. An APT is usually well funded and its target is mostly organizations or nations for business or political reasons. The purpose of APT is to deploy customized malware on one or more of the targets systems and remain undetected. Most attackers lack the skill-set, resources or persistence to carry out an APTs.
Algorithm Attacks: Algorithm attacks take advantage of algorithms in a piece of legitimate software to generate unintended behaviors. For example, algorithms used to track and report how much energy a computer consumes can be used to select targets or trigger false alerts. They can also disable a computer by forcing it to use up all its RAM or by overworking its central processing unit (CPU).
Denial of Service (Dos) attack is a kind of network attack that results in some kind of network interruption to users, devices and applications.
Two major types of DoS attacks:
Overwhelming Quantity of Traffic: A situation where a network, host or application is sent an enormous quantity of data at a rate which it cannot handle. This causes a slow down in response or transmission which might lead to a crash of service or device and can lead to a significant loss of time and money.
Maliciously Formatted Packets is when a maliciously formatted packet is sent to a host or application and the receiver is unable to handle it and it causes the receiving device to run very slowly or crash.
Distributed Denial of Service (DDos) is similar to a DoS attack but comes from multiple coordinated sources. An example is where an attacker builds a  botnet which is a group of infected hosts, they are called zombies and are controlled by the attacker, these zombies continue to infect more host thereby creating more zombies. When the attacker is ready, he instructs these botnet to carry out a DDoS attack.
Search engine optimization (SEO) is a technique used to improve a website ranking by search engine.
SEO poisoning is an attack on SEO to make a malicious website rank higher in search engine. Its goal is to increase traffic in the site where it host malware or perform social engineering. They take advantage of popular search terms.
Blended attack is an attack that uses multiple techniques to compromise a target. These techniques can be hybrid of worms, trojan horses, keyloggers, spyware, spam and phishing schemes. The most common type of blended attack uses spam email messages, instant messages, legitimate website to distribute links where malware is secretly downloaded in the computer. They also uses DDos combined with phishing emails.
Examples of computer worms include; Nimbda, CodeRed, BugBear, Klez, Slammer, Conficker and Zeus/Licat worms. Some Nimbda variant uses email attachment, file downloads from a compromised web server and microsoft file sharing, they also modify system guest account to provide malicious code with administrative privileges.
Impact Reduction are measures taken  when security breach is identified.
Here are some Impact measures to be taken when there is a security breach;
Communicate the issue both internally amongst employees and called to action and externally through direct official communication as a way to be transparent.
Be sincere and accountable in case the company is at fault.
Provide details and take care of the cost of  identity theft for affected customers.
Understand what caused and facilitated the breach, if necessary, hire forensic experts to research and learn the details.
Apply what was learned from the forensic investigation to ensure similar breaches do not happen in the future.
Ensure all system are clean, no back doors and nothing else installed to prevent attackers from taking same route.
Educate employees, partners and customers to avoid future breaches.