Cybersecurity is the ongoing effort to protect network system and its data from unauthorized use or harm.
Your Data includes; Medical data, Employment, Information online, Your identity, Education Data, Financial Data, Data on your computing devices.
There are two types of organizational data and they are Traditional and Internet of Things(IOT) and Big data
Traditional Data(Corporate data) includes Transactional data(personal information), intellectual properties and financial data.
Transactional Data(Personnel information) includes details relating to buying and selling,production activities, payroll, employee agreement, offer letters, application materials and any other materials used in making employment decisions.
Intellectual properties allows a business to gain economic advantage over its competitors and they are patent, trademarks, new product plan, etc. This property is also considered a trade secret and losing this information can be disastrous for the future of the company.
Financial data gives an insight into the health of the company. It includes; Balance sheet, income statements and cash flow statement of a company.
Internet of Things(IoT) is a large network of physical objects, such as sensors and equipment that extend beyond the traditional computer network.
The exponential growth of data through this means including expansion in storage services and capacity through the cloud and virtualization led to the creation of a new area of interest in technology and business called Big Data.
Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability(CIA) Triad is a guideline for information security in an organization.
Confidentiality ensures the privacy of data by restricting access through authentication encryption. In other words,  is a set of rules that prevents sensitive information from being disclosed to unauthorized people, resources and processes. Methods to ensure confidentiality include data encryption, identity proofing and two factor authentication.
Integrity assures that the information is accurate and trustworthy. In other words, ensures that system information or processes are protected from intentional or accidental modification. One way to ensure integrity is to use a hash function or checksum.
Availability ensures that the information is accessible to authorized persons. In other words, means that authorized users are able to access systems and data when and where needed and those that do not meet established conditions, are not. This can be achieved by maintaining equipment, performing hardware repairs, keeping operating systems and software up to date, and creating backups.
Security Breaches: is an incident that results in unauthorized access to data, applications, services or devices, exposing private information that attackers can use for financial gain or other advantages. Security breaches can lead to Reputational damage, Vandalism, Theft, Loss of revenue and damaged intellectual property.
Cyber Attackers: Attackers are individuals or groups who attempt to exploit vulnerability for personal or financial gain. Types of hackers includes; 
Amateurs: These are referred to as script kiddies or inexperienced hackers who use existing tools or instruction found in the internet to launch attacks. Some do this out of curiosity, while others do to demonstrate their skills and cause harm. In as much as they use basic tools, these attacks can still have devastating consequences.
Hackers: They are group of attackers that breaks into computer systems or networks to gain access. They are classified based on the intent of their break in.
White Hat Hackers: break into networks or computer systems to identify any weaknesses so that the security of a system or network can be improved. These break-ins are done with prior permission and any results are reported back to the owner.
Gray Hat Hackers: may set out to find vulnerabilities in a system but they will only report their findings to the owners of a system if doing so coincides with their agenda. Or they might even publish details about the vulnerability on the internet so that other attackers can exploit it.
Black Hat Hackers: take advantage of any vulnerability for illegal personal, financial or political gain.
Organized Hackers: These attackers include organizations of cyber criminals, hacktivists, terrorists and state-sponsored hackers.
Hacktivist make political statements to create awareness about issues that are important to them.
State-sponsored attackers gather intelligence or commit sabotage on behalf of their government. They are usually highly trained and well-funded and their attacks are focused on specific goals that are beneficial to their government.
Cyber attackers can be internal, i.e; Inside the organization or External, i.e outside the organization. Internal security comprises of Employees, Contract staff and Trusted partners whereas External security threat comprises of organized attackers, hackers and amateurs.
Cybersecurity professionals must have the same skills as the cyber attackers. Cybersecurity professionals must work within the bounds of the local, national and international law. Cybersecurity professionals must also use their skills ethically.
Cyberwarfare is an internet based conflict that involves the penetration of computer systems and network of other nations. These warfare can carry out conflicts without the clashes of traditional troops and machines, these attackers have the expertise and resources to launch massive internet based attacks against other nations to cause damage or disrupt services, such as shutting down a power grid. An example is Stuxnet malware that was designed to damage Iran nuclear enrichment, it was designed to damage physical equipment that was controlled by computers. It used modular coding that was programmed to perform a specific task within the malware. It has the ability to switch off oil pipelines, centrifuges that spin nuclear material. It does not borrow clearance like any other malware, it has a real clearance. Without its target, the virus remains dormant. Its a weapon that was made out of code.
Cyberwarfare can destabilize a nation, disrupt commerce, and affect the citizens’ faith in their government without ever physically invading the targeted nation.
Stuxnet is a malware program designed to damage the nuclear enrichment plant of Iran, a program which is an example of a state-sponsoredattack.
International Multilateral Partnership Against Cyber Threats (IMPACT)is a global partnership of world governments, industries, and academia dedicated to improving global capabilities when dealing with cyber threats.
Ethics are codes of behavior that are sometimes, but not always, enforced by laws.
Checksum is used to verify the integrity of files, or strings of characters after they have been transferred from one device to another across your local network or the internet. Checksums are calculated with hash functions. Some of the common checksums are MD5, SHA-1, SHA-256, and SHA-512
A hash function uses a mathematical algorithm to transform the data into a fixed length value that represents the data. From the hashed value, the original value cannot be retrieved directly. After a file is downloaded, you can verify its integrity by verifying the hash values from the source with the one you generated using any hash calculator. By comparing the hash values, you can ensure that the file has not been tampered with or corrupted during the transfer. (Integrity)
NB: Hash types creates different length of hash because a larger bit hash can provide more security because there are more possible combination.
Denial of Service(DoS) occurs when an attacker attempts to overwhelm resources so the services are not available to the users(Availability)