Troubleshooting is the process of identifying, locating and correcting problems. The process involves gathering information and using one or more structured troubleshooting methods.
Seven step troubleshooting process includes;
Definition of problem: The goal of this stage is to verify that there is a problem and then carefully define what the problem is. Problems are usually defined by symptoms, it is important to ask question and investigate the issue in order to localize the problem to a smaller range of possibilities.
Gather information: Th this step, targets to be investigated must be identified, access to the target devices must be obtained, and information gathered. Technicians may gather and document more symptoms depending on the characteristics that are identified.
Analyze information: Possible causes must be identified. The gathered information is interpreted and analyzed using network documentation, network baselines, searching organizational knowledge bases, searching the internet, and talking with other technicians.
Eliminate Possible Causes: If multiple causes are identified, then the list must be reduced by progressively eliminating possible causes to eventually identify the most probable cause.
Propose Hypothesis: When the most probable cause has been identified, a solution must be formulated. At this stage, troubleshooting experience is very valuable when proposing a plan.
Test Hypothesis: Before testing the solution, it is important to assess the impact and urgency of the problem. For instance, could the solution have an adverse effect on other systems or processes? The severity of the problem should be weighed against the impact of the solution. In some cases, a work around can be created until the actual problem is resolved.
Solve the Problem: When the problem is solved, inform the users and anyone involved in the troubleshooting process that the problem has been resolved. Other IT team members should be informed of the solution. It is important to properly document the cause and solution as this can assist other support technicians to prevent and solve similar problems in the future.
Structure Troubleshooting Methods: The troubleshooting method used varies depending on the type of problem and the personal experience of the technician. The below methods can be used to solve a problem
Bottom-Up: Start with the physical layer and the physical components of the network and move up through the layers of the OSI model until the cause of the problem is identified.
Top-Down: Start with the end-user applications and move down through the layers of the OSI model until the cause of the problem has been identified.
Divide and Conquer: Start by collecting user experiences of the problem, document the symptoms and then, using that information, make an informed guess as to which OSI layer to start your investigation.
Follow the Path: Discover the traffic path all the way from source to destination. This approach usually complements one of the other approaches.
Substitution: Physically swap the problematic device or component with a known, working one. If the problem is fixed, then the problem is with the removed item. If the problem remains, then the cause is elsewhere.
Comparison: Compare specifics such as configurations, software versions, hardware, or other device properties, links, or processes between working and nonworking situations and spot significant differences between them.
Educated Guess: A less-structured troubleshooting method that uses an educated guess based on the experience of the technician and their ability to solve problems.
In summary, software problem are solved using a top-down appproach while hardware problem are solved using the bottom-up approach, then new problems may be solved by an experienced technician using the divide and conquer method or bottom up approach. Troubleshooting is a skill that is developed by doing it, any network problem solved is added to your skillset.
Documents Findings, Actions, and Outcomes: It is important to document all informations gathered during troubleshooting. A technician must document the;
Problem: This Includes the initial report of the problem, a description of the symptoms, information gathered and any other information that would help resolve similar problems.
Solution: This includes the steps taken to resolve the problem.
Commands and Tools Used: This includes the commands and tools used in diagonising the problem and solving the problem.
In all, verify the solution with the customer, have them test the solution and try to reproduce the problem once verified that the problem has been resolved, then update the documentation.
The OSI layers includes; Physical(cables, ports,interfaces), Data link(standard switch), Network(Router, multilayer switch), Transport(Router, Multilayer switch), Session, Presentation, Application(End system)