Troubleshooting is the process of identifying, locating and correcting problems. The process involves gathering information and using one or more structured troubleshooting methods.
Seven step troubleshooting process includes;
Definition of problem: The goal of this stage is to verify that there is a problem and then carefully define what the problem is. Problems are usually defined by symptoms, it is important to ask question and investigate the issue in order to localize the problem to a smaller range of possibilities.
Gather information: Th this step, targets to be investigated must be identified, access to the target devices must be obtained, and information gathered. Technicians may gather and document more symptoms depending on the characteristics that are identified.
Analyze information: Possible causes must be identified. The gathered information is interpreted and analyzed using network documentation, network baselines, searching organizational knowledge bases, searching the internet, and talking with other technicians.
Eliminate Possible Causes: If multiple causes are identified, then the list must be reduced by progressively eliminating possible causes to eventually identify the most probable cause.
Propose Hypothesis: When the most probable cause has been identified, a solution must be formulated. At this stage, troubleshooting experience is very valuable when proposing a plan.
Test Hypothesis: Before testing the solution, it is important to assess the impact and urgency of the problem. For instance, could the solution have an adverse effect on other systems or processes? The severity of the problem should be weighed against the impact of the solution. In some cases, a work around can be created until the actual problem is resolved.
Solve the Problem: When the problem is solved, inform the users and anyone involved in the troubleshooting process that the problem has been resolved. Other IT team members should be informed of the solution. It is important to properly document the cause and solution as this can assist other support technicians to prevent and solve similar problems in the future.
Structure Troubleshooting Methods: The troubleshooting method used varies depending on the type of problem and the personal experience of the technician. The below methods can be used to solve a problem
Bottom-Up: Start with the physical layer and the physical components of the network and move up through the layers of the OSI model until the cause of the problem is identified.
Top-Down: Start with the end-user applications and move down through the layers of the OSI model until the cause of the problem has been identified.
Divide and Conquer: Start by collecting user experiences of the problem, document the symptoms and then, using that information, make an informed guess as to which OSI layer to start your investigation.
Follow the Path: Discover the traffic path all the way from source to destination. This approach usually complements one of the other approaches.
Substitution: Physically swap the problematic device or component with a known, working one. If the problem is fixed, then the problem is with the removed item. If the problem remains, then the cause is elsewhere.
Comparison: Compare specifics such as configurations, software versions, hardware, or other device properties, links, or processes between working and nonworking situations and spot significant differences between them.
Educated Guess: A less-structured troubleshooting method that uses an educated guess based on the experience of the technician and their ability to solve problems.
In summary, software problem are solved using a top-down appproach while hardware problem are solved using the bottom-up approach, then new problems may be solved by an experienced technician using the divide and conquer method or bottom up approach. Troubleshooting is a skill that is developed by doing it, any network problem solved is added to your skillset.
Documents Findings, Actions, and Outcomes: It is important to document all informations gathered during troubleshooting. A technician must document the;
Problem: This Includes the initial report of the problem, a description of the symptoms, information gathered and any other information that would help resolve similar problems.
Solution: This includes the steps taken to resolve the problem.
Commands and Tools Used: This includes the commands and tools used in diagonising the problem and solving the problem.
In all, verify the solution with the customer, have them test the solution and try to reproduce the problem once verified that the problem has been resolved, then update the documentation.
The OSI layers includes; Physical(cables, ports,interfaces), Data link(standard switch), Network(Router, multilayer switch), Transport(Router, Multilayer switch), Session, Presentation, Application(End system)
Documentation: Common network documentation includes the following;
Physical and logical network topology diagrams.
Network device documentation that records all pertinent device information.
Network performance baseline documentation.
All network documentation should be kept in a single location, either as hard copy or on the network on a protected server. Backup documentation should be maintained and kept in a separate location.
Types of Networks:
Personal Area Network(PAN): A personal area network (PAN) is a network that connects devices, such as mice, keyboards, printers, smartphones, and tablets within the range of an individual person. These devices are most often connected with Bluetooth technology. Bluetooth is a wireless technology that enables devices to communicate over short distances.
Local Area Network(LAN): A local area network (LAN) is defined as a network that connects devices using wire cables in a small geographical area. However, the distinguishing characteristic for LANs today is that they are typically owned by an individual, such as in a home or small business, or wholly managed by an IT department, such as in a school or corporation.
Virtual Local Area Network(VLAN): allow an administrator to segment the ports on a single switch as if it were multiple switches. This provides more efficient forwarding of data by isolating traffic to only those ports where it is required. VLANs also allow end devices to be grouped together for administrative purposes.
Wireless Local Area Network(WLAN): A wireless LAN (WLAN) is similar to a LAN but wirelessly connects users and devices in a small geographical area instead of using a wired connection. A WLAN uses radio waves to transmit data between wireless devices.
Wireless Mesh Networks(WMN): A wireless mesh network (WMN) uses multiple access points to extend the WLAN. Businesses and municipalities can use WMNs to quickly add new areas of coverage.
Campus Area Network(CAN): is a group of interconnected LANs, belonging to the same organization and operating in a limited geographical area. These can be both academic campuses and business or corporate campuses. Campus area networks typically consist of several buildings interconnected by high-speed Ethernet links using fiber optic cabling.
Metropolitan Area Network(MAN): A metropolitan area network (MAN) is a network that spans across a large campus or a city. The network consists of various buildings connected through wireless or fiber optic media.
Wide Area Network(WAN): A wide area network (WAN) connects multiple networks that are in geographically separated locations. Individuals and organizations contract for WAN access from a service provider. Your service provider for your home or mobile device connects you to the largest WAN, the internet.
Vitual Private Network(VPN): A virtual private network (VPN) is used to securely connect to another network over an insecure network, such as the internet. The most common type of VPN is used by teleworkers to access a corporate private network. Teleworkers are network users that are offsite or remote.
In Enterprise network topologies, there are physical network topology and logical network topology. Different topology diagrams may include; Physical layout and connections, IP address and VLAN management, Security and VPN policies, Cloud services and management, Routing policies, Remote access policies for remote and hybrid workers.
Network Cloud Services and Application: There are three basic types of cloud computing:
Software as a Service(SaaS): Applications focused on the end user. Using this service, applications are usually accessed over the network using a web browser instead of installing the application locally in the end user's computer. Examples of Saas applications includes; Google sheets, Google calendar, Google Maps, Office 365, Salesforce.
Platform as a Service(Paas): This service is primarily for software developers, they provide the servers, storage, security, tools, database and other services to host the consumer's application. In other words, they provide developers where to write their codes whereas the infrastructure and operations are handled by the PaaS provider. Examples of PaaS services includes; Microsoft Azure, Salesforce Lightning, AWS lambda, AWS elastic Beanstalk, Google App Engine.
Infrastructure as a Service(Iaas): This a service where computing resources are supplied by a cloud service provider, it provides the virtual machines for storage, networking and other services. It is also responsible for the uptime requirements, power, and security of the VMs. Iaas is also used by both software developers and system administrators, these organizations do not host these systems in their data centers, the VMs and applications are managed by the IaaS cloud provider. Examples of IaaS services includes; Cisco Metacloud, Microsoft Azure, DigitalOcean, Google Compute Engine, Rackspace.
Anything/Everything as a Service(Xaas): This is not a specific cloud service, its defined as the delivery of anything and everything as a service. It examples includes; SaaS, PaaS, Iaas, Disaster recovery as a service(DraaS), Communication as a service(CaaS), Monitoring as a service(MaaS), Desktop as a service(DaaS).
Wireless Standards: These are standards that define how radio frequencies are used for wireless links. Most of the standards specify that wireless devices have one antenna to transmit and receive wireless signals on the specified radio frequency which can be 2.4GHz, 5 GHz or 6 GHz. Some of the newer standards that transmits and receives at higher speed require access points(APs) and wireless clients to have multiple antennas using the multiple-input and multiple-output(MIMO) technology, it helps to improve communication performance.
Licensed and Unlicensed Bands:
 The licensed spectrum refers to the bands (range of frequency) that are reserved for radio stations, cellular companies, and broadcast television stations. Media and cellular companies typical pay for the right to transmit over a specific frequency within the licensed spectrum.
 The unlicensed spectrum is open for anyone to use. The unlicensed spectrum is where we find IEEE 802.11 Wi-Fi technologies and is available free to the public. Anyone can transmit over the unlicensed spectrum.
 Network Device Documentation: This shouldcontain accurate, up-to-date records of the network hardware and software, it should include all pertinent information about the network devices.
 Establishing a Network Baseline: A baseline is used to establish normal network or system performance to determine the personality of a network under normal conditions. Establishing a network performance baseline requires collecting performance data from the ports and devices that are essential to network operation. 
 A network baseline should answer the following question; How does the network perform during a normal or average day? Where are the most errors occurring? What part of the network is most heavily used? What part of the network is least used? Which devices should be monitored and what alert thresholds should be set? Can the network meet the identified poicies? 
 The baseline also provides insight into whether the current network design can meet business requirements. Without a baseline, no standard exists to measure the optimum nature of network traffic and congestion levels. The initial network performance baseline sets the stage for measuring the effects of network changes and subsequent troubleshooting efforts. Therefore, it is important to plan for it carefully.
 Cisco Discovery Protocol(CDP):CDP is a Cisco proprietary layer 2 protocol that is used to gather information about Cisco devices which share the same data link. It is media and protocol independent and therefore runs on all Cisco devices, such as routers, switches, and access servers. It can be used to assist in network design decisions, troubleshooting, and making changes to equipment. It can also be used as a network discovery tool to determine the information about the neighboring devices.
 The Security Policy: This helps the IT team understand what they must do to keep the network operational and secure by using:
 Standard Operating Procedures(SOP): These define step-by-step actions that must be completed for any given task to comply with a policy. There are SOPs to follow when replacing network devices, installing (or uninstalling) applications, onboarding new employees, terminating existing employees, and more.
 Guidelines - These cover the areas where there are no SOPs defined.
 Help Desks: A help desk is a specialized team in an IT department that is the central point of contact for employees or customers.
 Ticketing Systems: Help desk ticketing systems help organizations manage user problems or requests. Ticketing software is specifically designed to ensure that corporate users or clients receive support in a timely and systematic manner. They also ensure that all tickets get noticed and addressed. There are ticketing systems designed for the needs of internal corporate users and other systems to support service providers or external customers.
 Question End Users: When entering the trouble ticket, the help desk technician must discover the who, what, and when of the problem. Speak at a technical level they can understand, avoid using complex terminology or industry jargon. Always listen or read carefully what the user is saying and taking notes can be helpful when documenting a complex problem.
 Establish the rule of (Know, Relate, and Understand). Two common method of interwiewing the user in the questioniing techniques includes; Open-ended questions and Closed-ended questions.
 Open-ended question: These types of questions allow users to explain the details of the problem in their own words and are useful to obtain general information.
 Closed-ended questions: These are simple yes, no, or single word answers that can be used to discover important facts about the network problem.
 Guidelines to open-ended user questions includes; Ask pertinent questions, Determine the scope of the problem, Determine when the problem occured/occurs, Determine if the problem is constant or intermittent, Determine if anything has changed, Use questions to eliminate or discover possible problems.
Active Listening: Actively listen to customers complaints without interruption, making sure that questions asked are open-ended question to better understand their challenges, then summarize. Then ask some follow up questions which should be closed-ended questions that should come with a yes or no or factual response. Use th information gathered to complete a trouble ticket and the technician should relate their understanding of the problem to the user to ensure both agree on the problem reported.
Cisco commands and their uses.
ping (host/ip address) - sends an echo to an address and awaits response
traceroute (target hostname or ip address) - Identifies the path a packet takes through the networks.
telnet (host/ip address) - connects to an ip address using telnet application. Use SSH whenever possible instead of Telnet.
ssh -l (user-id ip address) - connects to an IP address using SSH. SSH is more secure than Telnet.
show ip interface brief - Displays a summary status of all interfaces on a device.
show ipv6 interface brief - Useful for quickly identifying IP addressing on all interfaces.
show ip route/show ipv6 route - Displays the current IPv4 and IPv6 routing tables, which contains the routes to all known network destinations.
show protocols- Displays the configured protocols and shows the global and interface-specific status of any cofigured Layer 3 protocol.
ipconfig/all - Used to view ip and additional addressing details.
show version - Displays uptime, version information, and licensing information for the device software and hardware.
show interfaces - Displays detailed output for each interface, to display a detailed output for a single interface, include the interface type and number in the command.
show cdp neighbors detail - Displays detailed information about directly connected cisco neighbor devices.
show arp - Displays the contents of the ARP table (IPv4) and the neighbor table (IPv6).
show running-config - displays the current device configuration.
show vlan - displays the status of VLANS on a switch.
show port - displays the status of ports on a switch
show mac-address table - displays contents of switch's MAC address table.
show interface status - displays statistics and status information for network interfaces.
show inventory - Displays inventory information about specific components in a cisco device.
show switch - displays the switch stack status when switches are grouped together using cisco stackwise
show tech-support - command used to collect a large amount of information about the device for troubleshooting purposes, it also executes multiple show commands which can e provided to technical support representatives when reporting a problem.
For Linux... to check for the bandwith of your connectivity with the ISP we use the speedtest command.
ncat or nc is is an nmap suite of networking tool used in verifying connectivity to a device using a specific port
Analyze the information: In analyzing the information gotten from user, in order to solve an isssue we can get knowlege through...
Ticket software database- Most ticketing systems build a repository of previous tickets that can be searched to see if another technician resolved an identical or similar problem.
Vendor resources - Vendors maintain Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) documents that can be searched and may also offer online tools to help resolve problems. Some offer live chats to solve problems faster.
Online internet searches - Using search engines to see if a problem has been encountered before.
If the problem cannot be solved, then the ticket must be escalated to a more experienced IT staff member.
Some of the cisco commands will require a privilege EXEC mode access before functioning. The cisco IOS software seperates management access into two privilege level which are;
User EXEC Mode - This is privilege level 1 and indicated by a device prompt ending with a greater than (>) symbol (e.g., Router> or Switch>). It provides access to limited commands useful to a technician when verifying the basic operation of a device.
Privileged EXEC Mode - This is privilege level 15 and indicated by a prompt ending with a number (#) symbol (e.g., Router# or Switch#). It is the highest level available and should only be accessible by a network administrator. In this mode, all device commands are available including the ability to configure or change the configuration settings on the device. Use the enable command to enter the mode.
The Cisco IOS also provides command syntax check and context-sensitive help. If you enter a command incorrectly, the IOS will identify where you made an entry error. To access context-sensitive help, simply enter a question mark (?) while typing in a command.
Cisco IOS also does not require the entire command, argument, or keyword to be entered. The partial command entry must just be long enough to uniquely identify the full command. For instance, you can use en instead of entering the full command enable. The tab key can be used to complete the partial entry of a command, argument, or keyword.
Protocol Analyzer decodes the various protocol layers in a recorded frame and presents this information in a relatvely easy to use format. It can investigate packet content while flowing through the network. Wireshark is a software protocol analyzer, or "packet sniffer" application, used for network troubleshooting, analysis, software and protocol development, and education. Network Mapper (Nmap) is an open-source tool that allows you to scan IP addresses and ports in a network, discover services and open ports, and detect possible vulnerabilities.
A MAC address is obtained through an Address Resolution Protocol(ARP).
The MAC address is the physical address of the default gateway LAN interface of the router
A ping to a local host returns the MAC address of the PC Network Interface Card(NIC). A ping to a remote host returns the MAC address of the default gateway LAN interface.
MAC addresses for remote hosts are not known on the local network, so the MAC address of the default-gateway is used. After the packet reaches the default-gateway router, the Layer 2 information is stripped from the packet and a new Layer 2 header is attached with the destination MAC address of the next hop router.
The two terms commonly used in describing the amount of traffic flowing between two devices are Bandwith and Throughput.
Bandwith is the theoretical amount of data that can be transmitted from one device to another in an amount of time. It is measured in the number of bits per second.
Throughput is the measurement of the actual number of bits per second that are being transmitted across the media. It is always lower than the specified bandwith because traffic can encounter latency or delay during transmission.
Latency may be caused by any number of issues specifically the physical distance between the source and destination, there are other factors such as number of network devices encountered between the source and destination.
Remote access technologies enable support technicians to take controls of a user's desktop to view and configure settings on the user's computer. Examples of common remote desktop applications includes; Microsoft Remote Desktop, apple remote desktop, Team viewer, Zoho assist.
Remote Access with Telnet, SSH and RDP: Before the advent of GUI applications for remote access, we had other ways to remotely access user's computer using the CLI. Telnet, SSH and RDP were used.
Telnet servers listen for client request on TCP port 23. The Telnet connection is called a virtual terminal(vty) session. Telnet uses software to create a virtual device that provides features of a terminal session with access to the server’s command line interface (CLI). Telnet can provide access to the command-line interface (CLI), or console, of a networking device so that the device can be configured and monitored. Telnet provides a way to use a computer, connected via the network, to access a network device as if the keyboard and monitor were directly connected to the device. Although the Telnet protocol can require a user to login, it does not support transporting encrypted data. All data exchanged during Telnet sessions is transported as plaintext across the network. This means that the data can be easily intercepted and understood. This includes usernames and passwords.
The Secure Shell (SSH) protocol offers an alternate and secure method for server access. SSH provides the structure for secure remote login and other secure network services. It also provides stronger authentication than Telnet and supports transporting session data using encryption. SSH servers listen for client requests on TCP port 22.
PuTTY is a popular free and open-source terminal emulator program. This client application supports SSH, Telnet, and rlogin. Terra Term is another free and open-source terminal emulator that includes a macro scripting language and plugins. PuTTY and Tera Term can both use the SSH protocol for connections. Both assume that an SSH server, such as the one available with OpenSSH, is running on the destination device.
Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) was created by Microsoft. It uses a client-server model in which the client can connect to an RDP server that is running on a remote system to display the graphical user interface of the remote device. RDP servers and clients are included with Windows, and are available for OS X, Linux, and Unix via xrdp, which is a free and open-source implementation of the Microsoft RDP server.
MacOS, remote access functionality is provided by the Screen Sharing feature, which is based on Virtual Network Computing (VNC). Any VNC client can connect to a Screen Sharing server. VNC is a freeware product that is similar in functionality to RDP and works over port 5900.
Understanding VPNs: A VPN uses dedicated secure connections, routed through the internet, from the corporate private network to the remote user. When connected to the corporate private network, remote access VPN users become part of that network and have access to all services and resources as if they were physically connected to it.
A VPN is deployed in one of the following configuration;
Site-to-site VPN: A site-to-site VPN is created when VPN terminating devices, also called VPN gateways, are preconfigured with information to establish a secure tunnel. VPN traffic is only encrypted between these devices. Internal hosts have no knowledge that a VPN is being used.
Remote-Access VPNs: A remote-access VPN is dynamically created to establish a secure connection between a client and a VPN terminating device. For example, a remote access SSL VPN is used when you check your banking information online. Remote access users must install a VPN client on their computers to form a secure connection with the corporate private network. Special routers can also be used to connect computers to the corporate private network. The VPN software encrypts data before sending it over the internet to the VPN gateway at the corporate private network. VPN gateways establish, manage, and control VPN connections, also known as VPN tunnels. Using VPNs to access remote and cloud-based virtual computer workstations ensures greater security when this solution is in use.
Network Management Systems: Network management refers to two related concepts. First is the process of configuring, monitoring, and managing the performance of a network. Second is the platform that IT and network operations teams use to complete these tasks. Network management systems collect data from connected network devices such as switches, routers, access points, and client devices. They also give network administrators control over how those devices operate and interact with one another. The data captured from these devices is used to proactively identify performance issues, monitor security and segmentation, and accelerate troubleshooting. Network management systems typically use Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) and Remote Network Monitoring (RMON) to gather information from network devices.
Network management systems are deployed using two operational models which are Cloud-Based and On-premises.
Cloud-based systems are designed to provide flexibility and wide-ranging access to networks that are geographically dispersed. It also provide a high level of configurability and customization through open APIs and robust application ecosystems.
Cisco Meraki is a leading cloud-based network management platform that provides powerful network management capabilities without consuming user bandwidth.
On-premises network management systems can be used for large campus networks that require greater performance and scalability, their data can be stored onsite and their server is usually located in the core of the network. Although it can be accessed from the internet, remote access requires a VPN connection. They also provide advanced features such as analytics, assurance, and artificial intelligence(AI) and machine learning(ML).
Scripts, Automation and Programmability: Automation involves creating systems that operate themselves. Network automation is the process of automating the configuring, managing, testing, deploying, and operating of physical and virtual devices within a network. Any type of network can use network automation and it also enables the configuration and management of large numbers of devices simultaneously.
A scripting language such as Python can be used to create programs that automate network management processes, thus creating management and operational efficiencies while saving on the costs associated with manual network management.